how_to_eurec4a/dropsondes.md, before:

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.11.5
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Dropsondes dataset JOANNE

The following script exemplifies the access and usage of dropsonde data measured 
during EUREC4A - ATOMIC.  

More information on the dataset can be found at https://github.com/Geet-George/JOANNE/tree/master/joanne/Level_3#level---3.
If you have questions or if you would like to use the data for a publication, please don't hesitate to get in contact with the dataset authors as stated in the dataset attributes `contact` and `author`.

## Get data
* To load the data we first load the EUREC4A meta data catalogue. More information on the catalog can be found [here](https://github.com/eurec4a/eurec4a-intake#eurec4a-intake-catalogue).

```{code-cell} ipython3
import datetime
import numpy as np
import eurec4a
cat = eurec4a.get_intake_catalog()
```

* We can funrther specify the platform, instrument, if applicable dataset level or variable name, and pass it on to dask.

```{note}
Have a look at the attributes of the xarray dataset `ds` for all relevant information on the dataset, such as author, contact, or citation infromation.
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
ds = cat.dropsondes.JOANNE.level3.to_dask()
ds
```

## Load HALO flight phase information
All HALO flights were split up into flight phases or segments to allow for a precise selection in time and space of a circle or calibration pattern. For more information have a look at the respective [github repository](https://github.com/eurec4a/flight-phase-separation#segmentation-of-flights-during-eurec4a).

```{code-cell} ipython3
meta = eurec4a.get_flight_segments()
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
segments = [{**s,
             "platform_id": platform_id,
             "flight_id": flight_id
            }
            for platform_id, flights in meta.items()
            for flight_id, flight in flights.items()
            for s in flight["segments"]
           ]
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
segments_by_segment_id = {s["segment_id"]: s for s in segments}
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
segments_ordered_by_start_time = list(sorted(segments, key=lambda s: s["start"]))
```

We select all `dropsondes` with the quality flag `GOOD` from the first circle on February 5.

```{code-cell} ipython3
first_circle_Feb05 = [s["segment_id"]
                 for s in segments_ordered_by_start_time
                 if "circle" in s["kinds"]
                 and s["start"].date() == datetime.date(2020,2,5)
                 and s["platform_id"] == "HALO"
                ][0]
first_circle_Feb05
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
dropsonde_ids = segments_by_segment_id[first_circle_Feb05]["dropsondes"]["GOOD"]
dropsonde_ids
```

We transfer the information from our flight segment selection to the dropsondes data in the xarray dataset.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from functools import reduce
mask_sondes_first_circle_Feb05 = reduce(lambda a, b: a | b, [ds.sonde_id==d
                                                             for d in dropsonde_ids])
ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05 = ds.isel(sonde_id=mask_sondes_first_circle_Feb05)
```

## Plots
You can get a list of available variables in the dataset from `ds.variables.keys()`  

```{note}
fetching the data and displaying it might take a few seconds
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
%matplotlib inline
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
plt.style.use("./mplstyle/book")
```

### Temperature and relative humidity as stored in the xarray dataset

```{code-cell} ipython3
fig, (ax0, ax1) = plt.subplots(1, 2)
ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05.ta.plot(ax=ax0, cmap="magma", x="launch_time", y="alt")
ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05.rh.plot(ax=ax1, cmap="BrBG", x="launch_time", y="alt")
None
```

### Temperature and relative humidity profiles.
The temperature and humidity profiles are colored according to their launch time.

```{code-cell} ipython3
def dt64_to_dt(dt64):
    epoch = np.datetime64('1970-01-01T00:00:00')
    second = np.timedelta64(1, 's')
    return datetime.datetime.utcfromtimestamp(int((dt64 - epoch) / second))
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
fig, (ax0, ax1) = plt.subplots(1, 2)

y = ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05.alt

x0 = ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05.ta.transpose("alt", "sonde_id")
ax0.set_prop_cycle(color=plt.cm.viridis(np.linspace(0, 1, len(dropsonde_ids))))
ax0.plot(x0, y.data[:, np.newaxis])
ax0.set_xlabel(f"{x0.long_name} / {x0.units}")
ax0.set_ylabel(f"{y.name} / m")
ax0.legend([dt64_to_dt(d).strftime("%H:%M:%S")
            for d in ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05.launch_time],
           title=x0.launch_time.name)

x1 = ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05.rh.transpose("alt", "sonde_id")
ax1.set_prop_cycle(color=plt.cm.viridis(np.linspace(0, 1, len(dropsonde_ids))))
ax1.plot(x1, y.data[:, np.newaxis])
ax1.set_xlabel(f"{x1.long_name} / {x1.units}")
ax1.set_ylabel(f"{y.name} / m")
ax1.legend(ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05.sonde_id.values,
           title="sonde_id")

fig.suptitle('Dropsondes from 1st circle an February 5', fontsize=18)
None
```

### wind speed variations on HALO circles throughout February 5

```{code-cell} ipython3
mask_sondes_Feb05 = (ds.launch_time.astype("<M8[D]") == np.datetime64("2020-02-05")) & (ds.platform_id == "HALO")
ds_sondes_Feb05 = ds.isel(sonde_id=mask_sondes_Feb05)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
import matplotlib.dates as mdates
with plt.style.context("mplstyle/wide"):
    fig, ax = plt.subplots()
    ds_sondes_Feb05.wspd.load().plot(ax=ax, x="launch_time", y="alt")
    ax.xaxis.set_major_formatter(mdates.DateFormatter("%H:%M"))
    None
```

Commit message:

dropsondes / review: show missing timeslots in windspeed plot

how_to_eurec4a/dropsondes.md, after:

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.11.5
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Dropsondes dataset JOANNE

The following script exemplifies the access and usage of dropsonde data measured 
during EUREC4A - ATOMIC.  

More information on the dataset can be found at https://github.com/Geet-George/JOANNE/tree/master/joanne/Level_3#level---3.
If you have questions or if you would like to use the data for a publication, please don't hesitate to get in contact with the dataset authors as stated in the dataset attributes `contact` and `author`.

## Get data
* To load the data we first load the EUREC4A meta data catalogue. More information on the catalog can be found [here](https://github.com/eurec4a/eurec4a-intake#eurec4a-intake-catalogue).

```{code-cell} ipython3
import datetime
import numpy as np
import eurec4a
cat = eurec4a.get_intake_catalog()
```

* We can funrther specify the platform, instrument, if applicable dataset level or variable name, and pass it on to dask.

```{note}
Have a look at the attributes of the xarray dataset `ds` for all relevant information on the dataset, such as author, contact, or citation infromation.
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
ds = cat.dropsondes.JOANNE.level3.to_dask()
ds
```

## Load HALO flight phase information
All HALO flights were split up into flight phases or segments to allow for a precise selection in time and space of a circle or calibration pattern. For more information have a look at the respective [github repository](https://github.com/eurec4a/flight-phase-separation#segmentation-of-flights-during-eurec4a).

```{code-cell} ipython3
meta = eurec4a.get_flight_segments()
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
segments = [{**s,
             "platform_id": platform_id,
             "flight_id": flight_id
            }
            for platform_id, flights in meta.items()
            for flight_id, flight in flights.items()
            for s in flight["segments"]
           ]
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
segments_by_segment_id = {s["segment_id"]: s for s in segments}
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
segments_ordered_by_start_time = list(sorted(segments, key=lambda s: s["start"]))
```

We select all `dropsondes` with the quality flag `GOOD` from the first circle on February 5.

```{code-cell} ipython3
first_circle_Feb05 = [s["segment_id"]
                 for s in segments_ordered_by_start_time
                 if "circle" in s["kinds"]
                 and s["start"].date() == datetime.date(2020,2,5)
                 and s["platform_id"] == "HALO"
                ][0]
first_circle_Feb05
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
dropsonde_ids = segments_by_segment_id[first_circle_Feb05]["dropsondes"]["GOOD"]
dropsonde_ids
```

We transfer the information from our flight segment selection to the dropsondes data in the xarray dataset.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from functools import reduce
mask_sondes_first_circle_Feb05 = reduce(lambda a, b: a | b, [ds.sonde_id==d
                                                             for d in dropsonde_ids])
ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05 = ds.isel(sonde_id=mask_sondes_first_circle_Feb05)
```

## Plots
You can get a list of available variables in the dataset from `ds.variables.keys()`  

```{note}
fetching the data and displaying it might take a few seconds
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
%matplotlib inline
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
plt.style.use("./mplstyle/book")
```

### Temperature and relative humidity as stored in the xarray dataset

```{code-cell} ipython3
fig, (ax0, ax1) = plt.subplots(1, 2)
ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05.ta.plot(ax=ax0, cmap="magma", x="launch_time", y="alt")
ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05.rh.plot(ax=ax1, cmap="BrBG", x="launch_time", y="alt")
None
```

### Temperature and relative humidity profiles.
The temperature and humidity profiles are colored according to their launch time.

```{code-cell} ipython3
def dt64_to_dt(dt64):
    epoch = np.datetime64('1970-01-01T00:00:00')
    second = np.timedelta64(1, 's')
    return datetime.datetime.utcfromtimestamp(int((dt64 - epoch) / second))
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
fig, (ax0, ax1) = plt.subplots(1, 2)

y = ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05.alt

x0 = ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05.ta.transpose("alt", "sonde_id")
ax0.set_prop_cycle(color=plt.cm.viridis(np.linspace(0, 1, len(dropsonde_ids))))
ax0.plot(x0, y.data[:, np.newaxis])
ax0.set_xlabel(f"{x0.long_name} / {x0.units}")
ax0.set_ylabel(f"{y.name} / m")
ax0.legend([dt64_to_dt(d).strftime("%H:%M:%S")
            for d in ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05.launch_time],
           title=x0.launch_time.name)

x1 = ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05.rh.transpose("alt", "sonde_id")
ax1.set_prop_cycle(color=plt.cm.viridis(np.linspace(0, 1, len(dropsonde_ids))))
ax1.plot(x1, y.data[:, np.newaxis])
ax1.set_xlabel(f"{x1.long_name} / {x1.units}")
ax1.set_ylabel(f"{y.name} / m")
ax1.legend(ds_sondes_first_circle_Feb05.sonde_id.values,
           title="sonde_id")

fig.suptitle('Dropsondes from 1st circle an February 5', fontsize=18)
None
```

### wind speed variations on HALO circles throughout February 5

To have a look at the wind speed variations during the circles flown by HALO,
we again select the relevant soundings:

```{code-cell} ipython3
mask_sondes_Feb05 = (ds.launch_time.astype("<M8[D]") == np.datetime64("2020-02-05")) & (ds.platform_id == "HALO")
ds_sondes_Feb05 = ds.isel(sonde_id=mask_sondes_Feb05)
```

We now want to show a time-altitude plot of the soundings. In order to show larger gaps between consecutive soundings,
we first resample the data onto an equidistant grid (along `launch_time` in stead of `sound_id`) using nearest-neighbor
interpolation, but limit the maximum difference between sonde launch and interpolated time to 5 minutes. That way,
smaller gaps in the plot are filled while larger gaps are indicated as missing values.

```{code-cell} ipython3
import matplotlib.dates as mdates
with plt.style.context("mplstyle/wide"):
    fig, ax = plt.subplots()
    ds_sondes_Feb05.wspd.load() \
                   .swap_dims({"sonde_id": "launch_time"}) \
                   .resample(launch_time="1min").nearest(np.timedelta64(5, "m")) \
                   .plot(ax=ax, x="launch_time", y="alt")
    ax.xaxis.set_major_formatter(mdates.DateFormatter("%H:%M"))
    None
```
