how_to_eurec4a/p3_flight_tracks.md, before:

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.12
    jupytext_version: 1.7.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Flight tracks

The P3 flew 95 hours of observations over eleven flights, many of which were coordinated
with the NOAA research ship R/V Ronald H. Brown and autonomous platforms deployed
from the ship. Each flight contained a mixture of sampling strategies including:
high-altitude circles with frequent dropsonde deployment to characterize the large-scale
environment; slow descents and ascents to measure the distribution of water vapor
and its isotopic composition; stacked legs aimed at sampling the microphysical
and thermodynamic state of the boundary layer; and offset straight flight legs for
observing clouds and the ocean surface with remote sensing instruments and the
thermal structure of the ocean with _in situ_ sensors dropped from the plane.

As a result of this varied sampling the flight tracks are much more variable
then for most of the other aircraft.

General setup:
```{code-cell} ipython3
import xarray as xr
import numpy as np
import datetime
#
# Related to plotting
#
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import seaborn as sns
import colorcet as cc
%matplotlib inline
```
Now access the flight track data.

```{code-cell} ipython3
import eurec4a
cat = eurec4a.get_intake_catalog()
```

Mapping takes quite some setup. Maybe this should become part of the `eurec4a` Python module.

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
tags: [hide-cell]
---
import matplotlib as mpl
import matplotlib.ticker as mticker

import cartopy.crs as ccrs
from   cartopy.feature import LAND
from   cartopy.mpl.gridliner import LONGITUDE_FORMATTER, LATITUDE_FORMATTER
def ax_to_map(ax, lon_w = -60.5, lon_e = -49, lat_s = 10, lat_n = 16.5):
    # Defining boundaries of the plot
    ax.set_extent([lon_w,lon_e,lat_s,lat_n]) # lon west, lon east, lat south, lat north
    ax.coastlines(resolution='10m',linewidth=1.5,zorder=1);
    ax.add_feature(LAND,facecolor='0.9')

def set_up_map(plt, lon_w = -60.5, lon_e = -49, lat_s = 10, lat_n = 16.5):
    ax = plt.axes(projection=ccrs.PlateCarree())
    ax_to_map(ax, lon_w, lon_e, lat_s, lat_n)
    return(ax)

def add_gridlines(ax):
    # Assigning axes ticks
    xticks = np.arange(-65,0,2.5)
    yticks = np.arange(0,25,2.5)
    gl = ax.gridlines(crs=ccrs.PlateCarree(), draw_labels=True,linewidth=1, color='black', alpha=0.5, linestyle='dotted')
    gl.xlocator = mticker.FixedLocator(xticks)
    gl.ylocator = mticker.FixedLocator(yticks)
    gl.xformatter = LONGITUDE_FORMATTER
    gl.yformatter = LATITUDE_FORMATTER
    gl.xlabel_style = {'size': 10, 'color': 'k'}
    gl.ylabel_style = {'size': 10, 'color': 'k'}
    gl.right_labels = False
    gl.bottom_labels = False
    gl.xlabel = {'Latitude'}
```
Now set up colors to code each flight date during the experiment. One could choose
a categorical palette so the colors were as different from each other as possible.
Here we'll choose from a continuous set that spans the experiment so days that are
close in time are also close in color.

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
tags: [hide-cell]
---
def to_datetime(dt64):
    epoch = np.datetime64("1970-01-01")
    second = np.timedelta64(1, "s")
    return datetime.datetime.utcfromtimestamp((dt64 - epoch) / second)

# On what days did the P-3 fly? These are UTC.
flight_dates = [datetime.date(2020, 1, 17),
                datetime.date(2020, 1, 19),
                datetime.date(2020, 1, 23),
                datetime.date(2020, 1, 24),
                datetime.date(2020, 1, 31),
                datetime.date(2020, 2,  3),
                datetime.date(2020, 2,  4),
                datetime.date(2020, 2,  5),
                datetime.date(2020, 2,  9),
                datetime.date(2020, 2, 10),
                datetime.date(2020, 2, 11)]

# color map for things coded by flight date
#   Sample from a 255 color map running from start to end of experiment
norm = mpl.colors.Normalize(vmin=datetime.date(2020, 1, 15).toordinal(),
                            vmax=datetime.date(2020, 2, 15).toordinal())
flight_cols = [cc.m_bmy(norm(d.toordinal()), alpha=0.9) for d in flight_dates]  
flight_cols = [mpl.cm.viridis(norm(d.toordinal()), alpha=0.9) for d in flight_dates]  
```
Most platforms available from the EUREC4A `intake` catalog have a `tracks` element but
we'll use the `flight-level` data instead. We'll extract just the position data in
a separate dataset.

```{code-cell} ipython3
flight_level_data = xr.concat([cat.P3.flight_level[d].to_dask() for d in list(cat.P3.flight_level)], dim = "time")
nav_data = xr.Dataset({
    "time":flight_level_data.time,
    "lat" :flight_level_data.lat,
    "lon" :flight_level_data.lon,
    "alt" :flight_level_data.alt})
```
A map showing each of the eleven flight tracks:

```{code-cell} ipython3
fig = plt.figure(figsize = (12,13.6))

ax  = set_up_map(plt)
add_gridlines(ax)

for d in flight_dates:
    flight = nav_data.sel(time=d.strftime("%Y-%m-%d"))
    ax.plot(flight.lon,flight.lat,
            lw=2,alpha=0.5,c=flight_cols[flight_dates.index(d)],
            transform=ccrs.PlateCarree(),zorder=7,
            label="{:02d}-{:02d}".format(d.month, d.day))

plt.legend(ncol=3,loc=(0.0,0.0),fontsize=14,framealpha=0.8,markerscale=5, title="Flight date (MM-DD-2020)")
fig.tight_layout()    
```

Most dropsondes were deployed from regular dodecagons during the first part of the
experiment with short turns after each dropsonde providing an off-nadir look at
the ocean surface useful for calibrating the W-band radar. A change in pilots midway
through the experiment led to dropsondes being deployed from circular flight tracks
starting on 31 Jan. AXBTs were deployed in lawnmower patterns (parallel offset legs)
with small loops sometimes employed to lengthen the time between AXBT deployment
to allow time for data acquisition given the device's slow fall speeds.  Profiling
and especially _in situ_ cloud sampling legs sometimes deviated from straight paths to avoid hazardous weather.


Side view using the same color scale:

```{code-cell} ipython3
fig = plt.figure(figsize = (8.3,5))
ax = plt.axes()

for d in flight_dates:
    flight = nav_data.sel(time=d.strftime("%Y-%m-%d"))
    flight = flight.where(flight.alt > 80, drop=True) # Proxy for take-off time
    plt.plot((flight.time - flight.time.min()).astype('timedelta64[s]'), flight.alt/1000.,
             lw=2,alpha=0.5,c=flight_cols[flight_dates.index(d)],
             label="{:02d}-{:02d}".format(d.month, d.day))


plt.xticks(np.arange(10) * 3600 * 1e9, labels = np.arange(10))
ax.set_xlabel("Time after flight start (h)")
ax.set_ylabel("Aircraft altitude (km)")
sns.despine()
plt.tight_layout()
```
Sondes were dropped from the P-3 at about 7.5 km, with each circle taking roughly an hour;
transits were frequently performed at this level  to conserve fuel. Long intervals
near 3 km altitude were used to deploy AXBTs and/or characterize the ocean surface
with remote sensing. Stepped legs indicate times devoted to _in situ_ cloud sampling.
On most flights the aircraft climbed quickly to roughly 7.5 km, partly to deconflict
with other aircraft participating in the experiment. On the three night flights,
however, no other aircraft were operating at take-off times and cloud sampling
was performed first, nearer Barbados than on other flights.

Commit message:

Use book-wide style where possible

how_to_eurec4a/p3_flight_tracks.md, after:

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.11.2
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Flight tracks

The P3 flew 95 hours of observations over eleven flights, many of which were coordinated
with the NOAA research ship R/V Ronald H. Brown and autonomous platforms deployed
from the ship. Each flight contained a mixture of sampling strategies including:
high-altitude circles with frequent dropsonde deployment to characterize the large-scale
environment; slow descents and ascents to measure the distribution of water vapor
and its isotopic composition; stacked legs aimed at sampling the microphysical
and thermodynamic state of the boundary layer; and offset straight flight legs for
observing clouds and the ocean surface with remote sensing instruments and the
thermal structure of the ocean with _in situ_ sensors dropped from the plane.

As a result of this diverse sampling the flight tracks are much more variable
then for most of the other aircraft.

General setup:

```{code-cell} ipython3
import xarray as xr
import numpy as np
import datetime
#
# Related to plotting
#
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
plt.style.use(["./mplstyle/book"])
%matplotlib inline
```

Now access the flight track data.

```{code-cell} ipython3
import eurec4a
cat = eurec4a.get_intake_catalog()
```

Mapping takes quite some setup. Maybe this should become part of the `eurec4a` Python module.

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [hide-cell]

import matplotlib as mpl
import matplotlib.ticker as mticker

import cartopy.crs as ccrs
from   cartopy.feature import LAND
from   cartopy.mpl.gridliner import LONGITUDE_FORMATTER, LATITUDE_FORMATTER
def ax_to_map(ax, lon_w = -60.5, lon_e = -49, lat_s = 10, lat_n = 16.5):
    # Defining boundaries of the plot
    ax.set_extent([lon_w,lon_e,lat_s,lat_n]) # lon west, lon east, lat south, lat north
    ax.coastlines(resolution='10m',linewidth=1.5,zorder=1);
    ax.add_feature(LAND,facecolor='0.9')

def set_up_map(plt, lon_w = -60.5, lon_e = -49, lat_s = 10, lat_n = 16.5):
    ax = plt.axes(projection=ccrs.PlateCarree())
    ax_to_map(ax, lon_w, lon_e, lat_s, lat_n)
    return(ax)

def add_gridlines(ax):
    # Assigning axes ticks
    xticks = np.arange(-65,0,2.5)
    yticks = np.arange(0,25,2.5)
    gl = ax.gridlines(crs=ccrs.PlateCarree(), draw_labels=True,linewidth=1, color='black', alpha=0.5, linestyle='dotted')
    gl.xlocator = mticker.FixedLocator(xticks)
    gl.ylocator = mticker.FixedLocator(yticks)
    gl.xformatter = LONGITUDE_FORMATTER
    gl.yformatter = LATITUDE_FORMATTER
    gl.xlabel_style = {'size': 10, 'color': 'k'}
    gl.ylabel_style = {'size': 10, 'color': 'k'}
    gl.right_labels = False
    gl.bottom_labels = False
    gl.xlabel = {'Latitude'}
```

Now set up colors to code each flight date during the experiment. One could choose
a categorical palette so the colors were as different from each other as possible.
Here we'll choose from a continuous set that spans the experiment so days that are
close in time are also close in color.

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [hide-cell]

def to_datetime(dt64):
    epoch = np.datetime64("1970-01-01")
    second = np.timedelta64(1, "s")
    return datetime.datetime.utcfromtimestamp((dt64 - epoch) / second)

# On what days did the P-3 fly? These are UTC.
flight_dates = [datetime.date(2020, 1, 17),
                datetime.date(2020, 1, 19),
                datetime.date(2020, 1, 23),
                datetime.date(2020, 1, 24),
                datetime.date(2020, 1, 31),
                datetime.date(2020, 2,  3),
                datetime.date(2020, 2,  4),
                datetime.date(2020, 2,  5),
                datetime.date(2020, 2,  9),
                datetime.date(2020, 2, 10),
                datetime.date(2020, 2, 11)]

# color map for things coded by flight date
#   Sample from a 255 color map running from start to end of experiment
norm = mpl.colors.Normalize(vmin=datetime.date(2020, 1, 15).toordinal(),
                            vmax=datetime.date(2020, 2, 15).toordinal())
flight_cols = [mpl.cm.viridis(norm(d.toordinal()), alpha=0.9) for d in flight_dates]  
```

Most platforms available from the EUREC4A `intake` catalog have a `tracks` element but
we'll use the `flight-level` data instead. We'll extract just the position data in
a separate dataset.

```{code-cell} ipython3
flight_level_data = xr.concat([cat.P3.flight_level[d].to_dask() for d in list(cat.P3.flight_level)], dim = "time")
nav_data = xr.Dataset({
    "time":flight_level_data.time,
    "lat" :flight_level_data.lat,
    "lon" :flight_level_data.lon,
    "alt" :flight_level_data.alt})
```

A map showing each of the eleven flight tracks:

```{code-cell} ipython3
fig = plt.figure(figsize = (12,13.6))

ax  = set_up_map(plt)
add_gridlines(ax)

for d in flight_dates:
    flight = nav_data.sel(time=d.strftime("%Y-%m-%d"))
    ax.plot(flight.lon,flight.lat,
            lw=2,alpha=0.5,c=flight_cols[flight_dates.index(d)],
            transform=ccrs.PlateCarree(),zorder=7,
            label="{:02d}-{:02d}".format(d.month, d.day))

plt.legend(ncol=3,loc=(0.0,0.0),fontsize=14,framealpha=0.8,markerscale=5, title="Flight date (MM-DD-2020)")
```

Most dropsondes were deployed from regular dodecagons during the first part of the
experiment with short turns after each dropsonde providing an off-nadir look at
the ocean surface useful for calibrating the W-band radar. A change in pilots midway
through the experiment led to dropsondes being deployed from circular flight tracks
starting on 31 Jan. AXBTs were deployed in lawnmower patterns (parallel offset legs)
with small loops sometimes employed to lengthen the time between AXBT deployment
to allow time for data acquisition given the device's slow fall speeds.  Profiling
and especially _in situ_ cloud sampling legs sometimes deviated from straight paths to avoid hazardous weather.


Side view using the same color scale:

```{code-cell} ipython3
fig = plt.figure(figsize = (8.3,5))
ax = plt.axes()

for d in flight_dates:
    flight = nav_data.sel(time=d.strftime("%Y-%m-%d"))
    flight = flight.where(flight.alt > 80, drop=True) # Proxy for take-off time
    plt.plot((flight.time - flight.time.min()).astype('timedelta64[s]'), flight.alt/1000.,
             lw=2,alpha=0.5,c=flight_cols[flight_dates.index(d)],
             label="{:02d}-{:02d}".format(d.month, d.day))


plt.xticks(np.arange(10) * 3600 * 1e9, labels = np.arange(10))
ax.set_xlabel("Time after flight start (h)")
ax.set_ylabel("Aircraft altitude (km)")
```

Sondes were dropped from the P-3 at about 7.5 km, with each circle taking roughly an hour;
transits were frequently performed at this level  to conserve fuel. Long intervals
near 3 km altitude were used to deploy AXBTs and/or characterize the ocean surface
with remote sensing. Stepped legs indicate times devoted to _in situ_ cloud sampling.
On most flights the aircraft climbed quickly to roughly 7.5 km, partly to deconflict
with other aircraft participating in the experiment. On the three night flights,
however, no other aircraft were operating at take-off times and cloud sampling
was performed first, nearer Barbados than on other flights.
