how_to_eurec4a/unified.md, before:

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.12
    jupytext_version: 1.8.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# HALO UNIFIED dataset

The HALO UNIFEID dataset is a combination of [HAMP](https://amt.copernicus.org/articles/7/4539/2014/) radar and radiometer measurements, [BAHAMAS](http://www.halo.dlr.de/instrumentation/basis.html) aircraft position data and [dropsonde](https://github.com/Geet-George/JOANNE#joanne---the-eurec4a-dropsonde-dataset) measurements, all on a unified temporal and spatial grid. 

More information on the dataset can be found at `?`. If you have questions or if you would like to use the data for a publication, please don't hesitate to get in contact with the dataset authors as stated in the dataset attributes `contact` or `author`.

```{code-cell} ipython3
%pylab inline
```

## Get data
* To load the data we first load the EUREC4A meta data catalogue. More information on the catalog can be found [here](https://github.com/eurec4a/eurec4a-intake#eurec4a-intake-catalogue).

```{code-cell} ipython3
import eurec4a
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
cat = eurec4a.get_intake_catalog()
list(cat.HALO.UNIFIED)
```

* We can funrther specify the platform, instrument, if applicable dataset level or variable name, and pass it on to dask.

*Note: have a look at the attributes of the xarray dataset `ds` for all relevant information on the dataset, such as author, contact, or citation infromation.*

```{code-cell} ipython3
ds_radar = cat.HALO.UNIFIED.HAMPradar["HALO-0205"].to_dask()
ds_radiometer = cat.HALO.UNIFIED.HAMPradiometer["HALO-0205"].to_dask()
ds_bahamas = cat.HALO.UNIFIED.BAHAMAS["HALO-0205"].to_dask()
```

## Load HALO flight phase information
All HALO flights were split up into flight phases or segments to allow for a precise selection in time and space of a circle or calibration pattern. For more information have a look at the respective [github repository](https://github.com/eurec4a/halo-flight-phase-separation).

```{code-cell} ipython3
meta = eurec4a.get_flight_segments()
```

We select the flight phase we are interested in, e.g. the second circle on February 5 by it’s segment_id.

```{code-cell} ipython3
segments = {s["segment_id"]: {**s, "flight_id": flight["flight_id"]}
             for platform in meta.values()
             for flight in platform.values()
             for s in flight["segments"]
            }
seg = segments["HALO-0205_c2"]
```

We transfer the information from our flight segment selection to our radar and radiometer data in the xarray dataset.

```{code-cell} ipython3
ds_radar_selection = ds_radar.sel(time=slice(seg["start"], seg["end"]))
ds_radiometer_selection = ds_radiometer.sel(time=slice(seg["start"], seg["end"]))
ds_bahamas_selection = ds_bahamas.sel(time=slice(seg["start"], seg["end"]))
```

## Plots

+++

We plot reflectivity from the HAMP Radar, the flight altitude of HALO and brightness temperatures from the low-frequency channels along the 22 GHz water vapor line (K band) from the HAMP radiometer.

```{code-cell} ipython3
mpl.rcParams['font.size'] = 12

fig, (ax1, ax2) = plt.subplots(2,1,sharex=True, figsize=(10,5), constrained_layout=True, gridspec_kw={'height_ratios':(2, 1.2)})

# 1st plot: Radar dBZ and flight altitude
ds_bahamas_selection.altitude.plot(ax=ax1, x='time', color = 'black', label = 'flight altitude')
ax1.legend(loc ='upper left')
ds_radar_selection.dBZ.plot(ax= ax1, x='time', cmap ='cubehelix' )

# 2nd plot: Radiometer TB
## select low frequency channels along the 22 GHz water vapor line
low_freq = ds_radiometer_selection.frequency < 32
ds_radiometer_low_freq = ds_radiometer_selection.isel(frequency=low_freq)
## set line colors for 2nd plot
colors2 = plt.get_cmap("cividis")(np.linspace(0, 0.8, low_freq.values.sum()))
ax2.set_prop_cycle(color=colors2)
for frequency, data_radiometer in ds_radiometer_low_freq.groupby("frequency"):
    data_radiometer.tb.plot(ax=ax2, x='time', label=f'{frequency:.2f} GHz')
ax2.set_title('')
ax2.legend(bbox_to_anchor=(1,1.1))

ax1.set_xlabel('')
for ax in [ax1, ax2]:
    ax.spines['right'].set_visible(False)
    ax.spines['top'].set_visible(False)
```

Commit message:

update unified notebook with a dropsondes plot

how_to_eurec4a/unified.md, after:

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.12
    jupytext_version: 1.8.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# HALO UNIFIED dataset

The HALO UNIFEID dataset is a combination of [HAMP](https://amt.copernicus.org/articles/7/4539/2014/) radar and radiometer measurements, [BAHAMAS](http://www.halo.dlr.de/instrumentation/basis.html) aircraft position data and [dropsonde](https://github.com/Geet-George/JOANNE#joanne---the-eurec4a-dropsonde-dataset) measurements, all on a unified temporal and spatial grid. 

More information on the dataset can be found in [Konow et al. (2019)](https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-11-921-2019). If you have questions or if you would like to use the data for a publication, please don't hesitate to get in contact with the dataset authors as stated in the dataset attributes `contact` or `author`.

```{code-cell} ipython3
%pylab inline
```

## Get data
* To load the data we first load the EUREC4A meta data catalogue. More information on the catalog can be found [here](https://github.com/eurec4a/eurec4a-intake#eurec4a-intake-catalogue).

```{code-cell} ipython3
import eurec4a
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
cat = eurec4a.get_intake_catalog()
list(cat.HALO.UNIFIED)
```

* We can funrther specify the platform, instrument, if applicable dataset level or variable name, and pass it on to dask.

*Note: have a look at the attributes of the xarray dataset `ds` for all relevant information on the dataset, such as author, contact, or citation infromation.*

```{code-cell} ipython3
ds_radar = cat.HALO.UNIFIED.HAMPradar["HALO-0205"].to_dask()
ds_radiometer = cat.HALO.UNIFIED.HAMPradiometer["HALO-0205"].to_dask()
ds_bahamas = cat.HALO.UNIFIED.BAHAMAS["HALO-0205"].to_dask()
ds_dropsondes = cat.HALO.UNIFIED.dropsondes["HALO-0205"].to_dask()
```

## Load HALO flight phase information
All HALO flights were split up into flight phases or segments to allow for a precise selection in time and space of a circle or calibration pattern. For more information have a look at the respective [github repository](https://github.com/eurec4a/halo-flight-phase-separation).

```{code-cell} ipython3
meta = eurec4a.get_flight_segments()
```

We select the flight phase we are interested in, e.g. the second circle on February 5 by it’s segment_id.

```{code-cell} ipython3
segments = {s["segment_id"]: {**s, "flight_id": flight["flight_id"]}
             for platform in meta.values()
             for flight in platform.values()
             for s in flight["segments"]
            }
seg = segments["HALO-0205_c2"]
```

We transfer the information from our flight segment selection to our radar and radiometer data in the xarray dataset.

```{code-cell} ipython3
ds_radar_selection = ds_radar.sel(time=slice(seg["start"], seg["end"]))
ds_radiometer_selection = ds_radiometer.sel(time=slice(seg["start"], seg["end"]))
ds_bahamas_selection = ds_bahamas.sel(time=slice(seg["start"], seg["end"]))
ds_dropsondes_selection = ds_dropsondes.sel(time=slice(seg["start"], seg["end"]))
```

## Plots

+++

We plot reflectivity from the HAMP Radar, the flight altitude of HALO, relative humdity measurements from the dropsondes and brightness temperatures from the low-frequency channels along the 22 GHz water vapor line (K band) from the HAMP radiometer.

```{code-cell} ipython3
import typhon
mpl.rcParams['font.size'] = 12

fig, (ax1, ax2) = plt.subplots(2,1,sharex=True, figsize=(10,5), constrained_layout=True, gridspec_kw={'height_ratios':(2, 1.2)})

# 1st plot: Radar dBZ, flight altitude and relative humidity from the dropsondes
ds_bahamas_selection.altitude.plot(ax=ax1, x='time', color = 'black', label = 'flight altitude')
ax1.legend(loc ='upper left')
ds_radar_selection.dBZ.plot(ax= ax1, x='time', cmap ='cubehelix')
im= ds_dropsondes_selection.rh_mat.plot(ax=ax1,x='time', cmap = 'density', add_colorbar=False )
## we add a separate axis for the second colobar
cax = fig.add_axes([1, 0.52, 0.02, 0.48])
cbar = fig.colorbar(im, cax=cax, label='rh [%]')


# 2nd plot: Radiometer TB
## select low frequency channels along the 22 GHz water vapor line
low_freq = ds_radiometer_selection.frequency < 32
ds_radiometer_low_freq = ds_radiometer_selection.isel(frequency=low_freq)
## set line colors for 2nd plot
colors2 = plt.get_cmap("cividis")(np.linspace(0, 0.8, low_freq.values.sum()))
ax2.set_prop_cycle(color=colors2)
for frequency, data_radiometer in ds_radiometer_low_freq.groupby("frequency"):
    data_radiometer.tb.plot(ax=ax2, x='time', label=f'{frequency:.2f} GHz')
ax2.set_title('')
ax2.legend(bbox_to_anchor=(1,1.1))

ax1.set_xlabel('')
for ax in [ax1, ax2]:
    ax.spines['right'].set_visible(False)
    ax.spines['top'].set_visible(False)
```
